{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf200
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue233;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c93333;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh15700\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs72 \cf0 Getting Started With DANSYS
\fs24 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\qc\partightenfactor0

\fs48 \cf0 by Wolf VanZandt
\fs24 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \

\b Getting Started
\b0 \
\
My name is Wolf VanZandt and, to stay busy in retirement, I\'92ve programmed a powerful statistics spreadsheet that is free and available to amateurs and professionals who want to freely do their own research projects. This guide makes few assumptions. I assume that you have a computer with a browser and that you can open files (otherwise, how would you be reading this?) I don\'92t assume that you know anything about mathematics or statistics or that you know how to install an application on your computer, phone, or tablet. Although I will only go over the operating systems that LibreOffice is available for, I won\'92t make assumptions about your operating system. I assume that you are proficient in English, because that\'92s what I can use. Maybe someone will translate the DANSYS guideS into other languages.\
\
This document will help you get DANSYS on your computer, up and running, and it will direct you to information that will tell you how to use it.\
\
\

\b What is DANSYS?
\b0 \
\
DANSYS stands for Data ANalysis SYStem. It is a LibreOffice Calc spreadsheet supplemented with many extra built-in features, especially for statistics and other analytical procedures. Since it is a LibreOffice Calc document, I should first explain \'93LibreOffice\'94 and \'93Calc\'94.\
\
LibreOffice is a free office suite alternative to pricey suites like Microsoft Office and Lotus. I chose to use LibreOffice so that money would not be a barrier to people wanting to do their own research or to just learn. LibreOffice includes several components including:\
	Writer - a word processor\
	Impress - a presentation editor\
	Base - a database program\
	Math - a formula editor\
	Draw - a vector graphics editor\
	and, Calc - a spreadsheet program\
\
A spreadsheet is a document consisting of sheets, each sheet consisting of a large array of cells. Each cell is a powerful graphing, scientific calculator that can contain numerical values, text, dates and times, or formulas. The sheet can also store controls, pictures, graphics, videos, and audio files. Ranges of cells can contain matrices that can serve as inputs into formulas in other cells or charts. Behind the document is a Basic programming language that allows the user to create functions and routines of their own. \
\
Calc is a full feature spreadsheet that is as powerful as any of the more pricey spreadsheets, and it is integrated into the whole LibreOffice suite.\
\
DANSYS, then, is a Calc document with all the functionality of Calc and all the power of the LibreOffice package. In addition, DANSYS includes all the commonly used statistics procedures (from descriptive statistics and cross tabulation, to ANOVA and regression analysis), many advanced mathematics functions, and even less used but useful statistics functions (such as robust and nonparametric procedures), text functions (such as context analysis tools and reading level evaluators), geometric functions, financial functions, optimization functions, logic functions, and more.\
\
DANSYSX is an ever developing extended version of DANSYS with many additions such as distance functions, graphics, advanced regression procedures, combinatoric functions, and the Code programming language. Code is a language that looks somewhat like an assembly language that can be edited and run from a spreadsheet but that accesses all the functionality of Calc and DANSYS. Future extensions will include optimization procedures, quality control utilities, factor analysis and a great deal more.\
\

\b Who would use DANSYS?
\b0 \
\
Both LibreOffice and DANSYS are free, so they are ideal for the amateur mathematician or researcher with little money to spare, but the software is powerful enough to be of interest to professionals and academics in any discipline.\
\

\b Downloading and installing LibreOffice Calc
\b0 \
\
There are LibreOffice downloads for Windows, Mac, and Linux operating systems. It is also available in 117 languages at this printing (see {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.libreoffice.org/download/download/?type=mac-x86_64&version=6.3.4&lang=pick"}}{\fldrslt 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 https://www.libreoffice.org/download/download/?type=mac-x86_64&version=6.3.4&lang=pick}}
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2  for downloads.
\f0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 .)\
\
You can also get installers for older versions of LibreOffice or LibreOffice for Android. I have tried this one and at this printing, it needs a lot of work to be functional. But they are working on it and there may be a workable version in the future. There is also ongoing work on an online, cloud version of LibreOffice. Keep an eye on these developments.\
\
All the links and information you need to download LibreOffice are here:\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.libreoffice.org/download/download/"}}{\fldrslt 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 https://www.libreoffice.org/download/download/}}
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\

\f0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 I\'92m going to leave the instructions for the installation of LibreOffice to LibreOffice. As operating systems change, their install procedures are liable to change also and The Document People keep up with those things. They have a page to get you to the right instructions here:\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.libreoffice.org/get-help/install-howto/"}}{\fldrslt 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 https://www.libreoffice.org/get-help/install-howto/}}
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\

\b Downloading and installing DANSYS and DANSYSX
\b0 \
\
Once you have LibreOffice on your computer, DANSYS and it\'92s accessory files are easy.\
\
The downloads are here:\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://theriantimeline.com/excursions/labbooks"}}{\fldrslt 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 http://theriantimeline.com/excursions/labbooks}}
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 First, make sure you know where your downloads go. There is usually a Download file ( In Mac computers, check the Finder toolbar>Go menu for a Download file. In Windows and Linux, check the C drive for a Download file.) Alternately, most systems will let you choose where a download will go.\
\
At the right-hand column, scroll down to the blue, underlined title \'93DANSYS\'94  or \'93DANSYSX\'94 and left click it.  That will bring up a dialog that asks you where you want to place the file. Make a selection and then click the button at the bottom labeled \'93OK\'94 \'93Okay\'94, \'93continue\'94 or such. That opens the file into your computer. It should then be in the file you selected or your Download file. To open DANSYS or DANSYSX, open LibreOffice Calc, go to the Files>Open menu. That opens a dialog that let\'92s you search your computer\'92s memory for the file labeled DANSYS or DANSYSX. Double click the file name and your stat package should soon open in Calc.\
\
User guides\
\
My intention has been to create user guides that not only tell you how to use DANSYS but also how to do statistics. They are statistics textbooks, and I plan to have guides specifically for students, programmers, researchers, engineers, etc. Watch the Excursions page for new guides as they come out.\
\
LibreOffice has a library of user guides and quick reference sheets here. \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://documentation.libreoffice.org/en/english-documentation/"}}{\fldrslt 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 https://documentation.libreoffice.org/en/english-documentation/}}\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
LibreOffice also offers older editions and guides in many other languages.\
\
All the User guides for DANSYS and DANSYSX are on this page:\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://theriantimeline.com/excursions/labbooks"}}{\fldrslt 
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 http://theriantimeline.com/excursions/labbooks}}
\f1 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\ul \ulc2 \outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \ulnone \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Just like the spreadsheet documents, the user guides download when you click the blue, underlined links. The DANSYS User Guide takes a while to open in Calc, so be patient. Double click it in your memory and go get a cup of coffee or something.\
\
Other accessories\
\
I use the DANSYSX document as a form for producing other ebooks such as tutorials on different subjects. Those will be offered on the same Excursions page that houses the DANSYS files. I put them up \'93in progress\'94, so you can use the chapters as they are completed. \
\
Using DANSYS as the base for tutorials allows me to add interactive elements. I call the ebooks LabBooks.\
\
I have also created a Calc document that contains several interactive tools such as counters, timers, randomizers, etc. It\'92s called ToolBook and it\'92s also on the Excursions page. Notice that there is a file that should be loaded with ToolBook. That provides the information it needs to change what happens when you press a function key. Once you download the keystroke profile, open the ToolBook and go to the Tools menu and Customize. Click the Keyboard and Load buttons to browse for the file named \'93Tlbk.cfg\'94. Double click that file and Calc will install the keystroke profile into ToolBook. }