{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset238 Courier New CE;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Tahoma;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}}
{\colortbl ;\red96\green96\blue96;\red0\green0\blue255;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.17763}\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\cf1\f0\fs24\lang1033\par
\ul\b --- Why think critically? ---\ulnone\b0\par
\par
\cf0\f1\fs16 Why think critically?\par
\par
I'm actually getting the cart before the horse, here. First we need to ask, "Why vote?" because only 55.7% of the voting population in the United States voted in the 2016 elections - the lowest voter turnout in the nation's history. (The Sanders Instiute, {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.sandersinstitute.com/blog/why-dont-americans-vote }}{\fldrslt{https://www.sandersinstitute.com/blog/why-dont-americans-vote\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs16  , accessed 5/20/19). On off years, years that do not have a presidential election, turnout is typically much smaller. In 2014, voter turnout was 36.4%.\par
\par
The Sanderson Institute, in the article sited above, asked why Americans don't vote. Here are their answers.\par
\par
Only 16 of the 50 states have open primaries. In America, there are two large parties, the Democratic party and the Republican party. There can be many other smaller parties but the last time a third party candidate won any state's electoral college vote was in 1968. Primaries are held to decide who the two candidates with any chance of winning will be and, in most states, only voters who declare an affiliation with one of the two parties can vote in the primary. 19 states have rules that partially restrict unaffiliated votes from voting in the primaries. In comparison,  according to a 2018 Gallup poll, 46% of Americans do not identify with a political party.\par
\par
More than 21 million Americans do not have government issued photo identification and 34 states request or require voters to show some form of identification to vote. This selectively eliminates the elderly, the poor, and minorities. Whereas only 8% of white Anericans do not have a photo identification, 25% of voting-age African American citizens do not have a government issued ID.\par
\par
6.1 million Americans cannot vote due to prior felony convictions. In Maine and Vermont, felons can vote. In 16 states, felons cannot vote while encarcerated. In 25 states, felons have to wait until after encarceration, parole, and/or probation before they regain the right to vote. and in 9 states, voter restoration must come from the action of the governor or court.\par
\par
D.C. residents have three electorial college votes in presidential elections but American citizens from Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, North Mariana Islands, and Guam do not have electoral colleges, so they cannot vote in presidential elections. About 4.4 million Americans live in these territories and the District of Columbia.\par
\par
Citizens of voting age must register to vote and laws governing how to vote differ significantly from state to state. Voters must do considerable research to even know how to vote, much less to understand who the should vote for. In addition, there is a strong correlation between voter turnout and states that offer same-day registration.\par
\par
In most democratic countries around the world, voting happens on a day on which people are not working (Sunday, weekend, or voting holiday). In the United States, voting traditionally occurs on a Tuesday and people have to get off work to vote in states that only have poll sites. Polls in different states open and close at different times in different states. 13 states do not allow for early voting except for absentee ballots that require a written excuse. 7 states allow early voting. 27 states allow early voting and non-excused absentee voting. Only three states have mail in voting.\par
\par
And, of course, electoral college representation skews state voting power in ways almost incomprehensible to voters.\par
\par
Through published surveys and direct interviews, the National Public Radio found that, where the turnout for midterm elections in older adults is about 50%, the turnout for young voters is about 20% and commonly stated reasons is that they don't feel they know enough about the system to vote intelligently and they don't feel that their vote has any impact on election outcomes. (National Public Radio (2018) On the Sidelines of Democracy: Exploring Why So Many Americans Don't Vote. {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.npr.org/2018/09/10/645223716/on-the-sidelines-of-democracy-exploring-why-so-many-americans-dont-vote }}{\fldrslt{https://www.npr.org/2018/09/10/645223716/on-the-sidelines-of-democracy-exploring-why-so-many-americans-dont-vote\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs16  last accessed 5/20/19)\par
\par
The same study found that many older adults also feel that their votes do not matter. People with only a high school education and who make less than $30,000 a year, and minorities are less likely to vote.\par
\par
For a detailed analysis of these factors that keep American citizens away from the polls, see the Pew Research Center study, Who Votes, Who Doesn't, and Why: Regular Voters, Intermittent Voters, and Those Who Don't (2006) {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.people-press.org/2006/10/18/who-votes-who-doesnt-and-why }}{\fldrslt{https://www.people-press.org/2006/10/18/who-votes-who-doesnt-and-why\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs16  (accessed 5/20/19).\par
\par
So, how do you feel about voting? I hope, through this book, to give you some good reasons and ways to make them work.\par
\par
Let's look at how the United States is supposed to work - how the founders set things up to protect the country from things like tyranical government officials, imbalances of power, and special interest groups that might harm the country for the sake of their own benefit.\par
\par
It is usually said (I've said it myself many times) that there are three branches of government. That isn't supposed to be true. There are actually four branches of the government, as intended by the founders. The legislative branch makes the laws, the judicial branch interprets the laws, the executive branch carries out the laws, and the popular branch - the citizens - you and me - set up the whole machine to work the way we want it to - with soem important limitations. All four branches are restricted from extreme and harmful actions by "balances of power."  Each branch has ways to restrict the other branches. \par
\par
Unless the balance of power is upset, it's not easy to change things. It, as they say, "takes an act of congress" and the president and supreme court have ways to stand in the way of congress from acting.\par
\par
There are a few dynamics that I want to emphasize here and I'm going to use something that is in just about everyone's life - the computer - to do that.\par
\par
As a sociologist, I look at organizations (like the United States) as individuals. Philosophy comes into play when you try to figure out how we "know" anything. Plato, at least according to the Meno, believed that the human soul was immortal, existing before and after it acquired a body, and that everyone was born with all the knowledge that is. Learning is just remembering what you already know. At the other extreme, John Locke held that the human mind is completely empty at birth and ready to be loaded with knowledge. Somewhere between, Immanuel Kant figured that, if there was not something in the mind at first, then people wouldn't know how to learn and that learning would be impossible. He thought that the mind is never blank. It comes with "programming" that allows a person to acquire knowledge.\par
\par
Your computer has a Kantian mind. Some of it's programming is built in to the hardware part of its makeup - mostly in the CPU (Central Processing Unit) and in the BIOS (Basic Input/Output System chips). The programming in the CPU is mostly instructions for performing calculations, translating binary codes (computers can only work, at base, with 0s and 1s), and moving data around in memory. The programming in the BIOS chip tells the computer how to interact with the outside world (keyboards, mice, external memory devices, graphics boards, monitors, etc.). Without the BIOS, the computer would just sit and stare into space. \par
\par
And you wouldn't want this basic programming to be easily changed. Temporary memory, the data storage that most people interact with, is temporary because it can be changed. Data and software can be loaded into and deleted out of it.\par
The problem is that things can spontaneously change in temporary memory because of noise in the environment, if nothing else. If one of those 1s in the computer's memory changes to a 0, it could completely cripple the program it's in. If the change were in the basic programming, it could distroy the computer's ability to "think" or to interact with you, so you don't want this programming to be changeable. That's why the basic instruction set is built into the material circuitry of the computer.\par
\par
And that's why you can't change this programming unless you replace the CPU and BIOS chips (which would essentially create a different computer.)\par
\par
What you recognize as your computer's "mind" is an operating system like MacOS, Windows, Linux, etc. When you buy a computer, the operating system is either already loaded into the computer's temporary memory or you load the operating system into it when you first start it up. \par
\par
Early computers kept the CPU and BIOS programming on the CPU chip and the user had to enter information as lines of text, and very specific lines of text at that called "machine code" (all 1s and 0s) and assembly language code, which consisted of three or more letter abbreviations of the individual actions that the CPU could do. Now, operating systems let users click buttons, drag scroll bars, and do other things on the screen to get things done.\par
\par
If something in the operating system program code changes, either because of some random noise or because the computer picks up a malicious program like a virus, the operating system is said to be corrupted. There is corruption in the code. Remember that word - "corruption". Corruption makes things not work right.\par
\par
Early computer users were programmers by necessity. Things have evolved to the point that a user may never program, indeed, may only use a few specific programs loaded before the computer was purchased or loaded from the Internet after purchase. To these users, the computer's inner workings are often invisible.\par
\par
So, how does the computer's programming look to modern users?\par
\par
Many modern computer users do not even know that CPUs and BIOSs exist. Those that do rarely interact with them. They don't really need to. The only way to change the CPU is to change the chip (or buy a new computer, which amounts to much the same thing.) The user can tweek the BIOS by changing parameters stored elsewhere and accessed by the BIOS. Generally the values set at the factory are optimal for most computers. Sometimes an advanced user will want to change the clock speed or set the system clock, reallocate chunks of memory for certain applications, select devices to get instructions from in case of a crash, and other things that most users don't want to be bothered with.\par
\par
Tweeking the BIOS is not a straightforward operation. The user has to press a specific key at just the right time as the computer is starting up. Many advanced users will just repeatedly press the key until the BIOS control panel appears. The labels for the parameters are often rather esoteric. For instance, what is a BCV Priority? And, you can change the values so that your computer just doesn't work.\par
\par
Since the operating system is what a user sees when they look at their screen and its what they usually interact with, most of them will familiarize themselves with the operating system, or at least part of it. The operating system can be changed fairly easily by simply downloading another operatiing system. It takes some time and vigilance as the installation program runs through it's steps but it will usually provide reasonably good instructions to the user.\par
\par
Most other applications are easier and take less time to install but their installation programs will work more or less like those for operating systems. And the user's files, the ones they create, are easy to change. While I'm typing this document in a program called "KeyNote", I can save it, close the program, recall the document, add to it, make changes....once familiar with the generating program, KeyNote, the rest is easy.\par
\par
Governments are Kantian minds.\par
\par
The United States, specifically, was born in 1776 with a mind pre-equipped with specific ways it thinks about things. The CPU and BIOS, in this case is the Constitution of the United States of America. The constitution (of any government) describes the structure and inner workings of the government. Ideally, it can't be changed. Changing a constitution creates a different government. The United States Constitution embodies certain ideals that are integral to the nature of the country.\par
\par
Although it can't be changed, like the BIOS of a computer, a constitution can be tweaked by adding clauses called 'amendments". This process can be easy or hard. The Constitution of the State of Alabama is amended just about every time an election occurs. If a county wants to levee a tax for the purpose of, say, building a school, the whole state has to agree to it and vote for an amendment to the constitution. The result is that the Alabama Constitution is that there are 928 amendments (as of 2018). There have, in fact, been five Alabama Constitutions, the present having been ratified in 1901. Since then, there has been debate about rewriting the monster into a smaller, more manageable document.\par
\par
Since it's signing in 1776, the United States Constitution has been amended only 27 times. The amendment process is intentionally difficult. Congress starts the process by proposing an amendment. That takes a two-thirds majority vote in both the House of Representatives and the Senate. If passed, the proposal is sent to the 50 States and must be ratified by three-fourths of the States (at least 38 of the 50 States).\par
\par
Only one amendment has been undone. The 18th amendment prohibited the manufacture or sales of alcohol within the United States, and the 21st amendment repealed it.\par
\par
The intention of the original authors of the Constitution was that government would have as little hand in the lives of citizens as possible. There was an understanding that people, even large groups of people (and, perhaps, especially so) were not perfect and that traits like greed and beligerance could easily undo a country and, so, there was a need for some regulation, but the language in the constitution strongly protected the rights of the individual States to fashion their own governments. It also gave the individual citizen ways of influencing the way government works. The doctrine of majority rule and minority right is embedded in the Constitution. Majorities rule by sheer number when elections happen. Minorities are granted specific rights (such as the famous "life, liberty, and the persuit of happiness") and are given tools to allow them to persuade the majority to see things their way. For instance, United States citizens are given the right to assemble and make their views public.\par
\par
Citizens, via activism, can even pressure elected officials to change policy. Local policy is gnereally easier to change than State policy, and State policy is more accessible than Federal policy, but the tools are there. But, like there are many computer users that only want to use a particular kind of software, say, a word processor, and show little interest in the inner workings of their computer, many citizens show little interest in the inner workings of their government.\par
\par
I'm glad that someone understands the inner workings of the United States government but it bothers me that the people who do know are not usually the people who were born here. Emigrants have to take courses and be tested to show that they understand how the gorvernment works in order to be citizens. People born here just have to....well, be born here.\par
\par
It strikes me that people are very willing to read the driver's manual of a new car but few want to take the time to educate themselves on things like their bodies, personal finance, and the workings of their government, things that have not a small affect on their lives.\par
\par
I emphasize that this is how the United States is supposed to work because, over time, people with personal agendas that do not directly relate to the wellbeing of the country have found ways around the safeguards in the Constitution and have slowly taken influence away from the fourth branch.\par
\par
Computers can be corrupted. Countries can also be corruption. Political activists often talk about "corruption in government". This is what they're talking about.\par
\par
 For citizens to influence their government, they have to be active in politics and the most obvious power they have is the power of a vote. They can select the officials that run the country and they can ensure that those officials will be the ones with shared values.\par
\par
In the 2016 presidential election, only 55.7% voting age American citizens voted, the smallest voter turnout in America's history. Of the 245.5 million Americans 18 years or older, 157.6 million reported that they were registered to vote, while only 137.5 million said that they voted in the census. Only about 136.8 million votes were actually tallied. (Desilver, Drew (2018) "U.S. trails most developed countries in voter turnout". FactTank: News in the Numbers, May 21, 2018. Pew Research Center. Accessed at {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/05/21/u-s-voter-turnout-trails-most-developed-countries }}{\fldrslt{https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/05/21/u-s-voter-turnout-trails-most-developed-countries\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs16   6/19/19)\par
\par
So, why don't people vote? Let's look at the Sanders Institute report again.\par
\par
The Sanders Institute, an organization committed to encouraging individuals, organizations, and the media to actively engage in the political process to create progressive solutions to economic, environmental, and social justice problems, asked this question. Based on several published studies, they published their results in the article "Why don't Americans vote?" on the Sanders Institute website ({{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.sandersinstitute.com/blog/why-dont-americans-vote }}{\fldrslt{https://www.sandersinstitute.com/blog/why-dont-americans-vote\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs16   accessed 6/19/19). Here are the answers they found.\par
\par
\par

\pard{\pntext\f2\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf2\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-200\li240 Because we have developed a strong two party system, Americans are, in effect, given only two options in a presidential election. Further, many Americans live in states that allow voters to vote in primaries only if they are  registered party members. In the thirteen states and DC that have closed primaries, unaffiliated voters have no say in who the two people running for president will be.\par
{\pntext\f2\'B7\tab}Thirty-four states require citizens to show identification to vote. Voter ID laws selectively filter out the poor, the elderly and minorities. A quarter of African Americans of voting age do not have a government issued identification as compared to eight percent of white citizens.\par
{\pntext\f2\'B7\tab}Many states take voting rights from felons. In nine states, felons lose their rights to vote forever unless their rights are restored by a Governor's or court's action. Other states limit voting rights to felons only while encarcerated or until completion of their sentence.\par
{\pntext\f2\'B7\tab}Residents in American Samoa, Guam, North Mariana Islands, and the U.S. Virgin Islands do not have electoral college votes, so they are barred from presidential elections. Washington D.C. has three electoral college votes but they have no Senators and only one Congress person, who cannot vote during floor votes.\par
{\pntext\f2\'B7\tab}Citizens of voting age in America are not automatically registered for voting. Some states make registration easier than others. Registration deadlines can be confusing and, again, vary from state to state.\par
{\pntext\f2\'B7\tab}Many citizens must take time off work to vote since Voting Day in America is on a Tuesday. Convenience of voting differs greatly from state to state. Thirteen states having 64 million Americans do not offer the option of early voting or no-excuse absentee voting.\par
{\pntext\f2\'B7\tab}The electoral college does not represent states proportionally to their populations. In the 2016 elections, Hillary Clinton won the popular vote with 65,853,516 votes compared to President Trump's 62,984,825 votes. In contrast, Trump received 306 electoral college votes to Secretary Clinton's 232 electoral college votes.\par

\pard\par
Because of these and other reasons, many Americans do not feel that their votes count and, therefore, do not go to the trouble of voting.\par
\par
Is this an illusion? Have American voters actually lost the potential to make changes in American politics through voting?\par
\par
Martin Gilens and Benjamin Page (Gilens, Martin and Benjamin I. Page (2014) Testing Theories of American Politics: Elites, Interest Groups, and Average Citizens. Perspectives on Politics, Volume 12, Issue 3, September 2014, pp. 564-581. Also available at {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://amadorcountynews.org/2014-04/American%20Politics%20-%20Elites,%20Interest%20Groups,%20and%20Average%20Citizens.pdf }}{\fldrslt{http://amadorcountynews.org/2014-04/American%20Politics%20-%20Elites,%20Interest%20Groups,%20and%20Average%20Citizens.pdf\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs16  (accessed 6/24/19) analyzed a data set containing a massive amount of information about policy positions of the general public between 1981 and 2002. They compared the result to positions favored by affluent Americans and those of powerful interest groups. Their results indicated that economic elites and organized interest groups supporting business interest have substantial impact on government policy in the United States, whereas average citizens and mass based interest groups have little or no influence.\par
\par
Apparently, politicians listen to those who support them....with money.\par
\par
That gives some pretty strong support to the idea that, no, voters do not have much potential to make changes in American politics through voting.\par
\par
So, again, why vote?\par
\par
Voting represents a powerful tool to return political power to the fourth branch of American government - citizens. Here are some suggestions for a voting strategy to do that.\par
\par
Vote from the ground up. Voters have little influence on national politics but they still have considerable impact on local elections, and local officials rise in the system to become state and federal officials. \par
\par
Vote grassroots. Grassroots politicians do not take campaign funds from big ticket sources like big business or large interest groups. They look to the voters for support. Since candidates listen to the sources of their funds for direction in policy decisions, grassroots candidates will be looking to their supporters....voters.\par
\par
Vote intelligently. That's what this book is about. Know what the issues are and set goals to vote for the candidates that support policy that will fix the broken American system. Educate yourself on issues like campaign reform and various models of voting. The electoral college is not the only form of voting and it is not specified in the Constitution. Research the candidates in every election and know not only what they say they stand for, but also what they have shown that they stand for in past policy decisions.\par
\par
Vote as one element of political activism. Voting can be a powerful tool for citizens but it won't work alone. Voters need to be active in public debate. Although typical voters feel powerless and tend to be lethargic in their voting behavior, voters influence voters. Door-to-door campaigns, organized volunteer distribution of campaign information, citizen activism education, and other forms of activism inform voters.\par
\par
Political corruption isn't going to budge by itself, but concerted action by citizens can move it.\par
\par
Some strategies just aren't effective, so why employ them?\par
\par
Only five presidents have never been elected to public office before becoming president but most of them had been appointed to public offices previously (Wikipedia, List of Presidents of the United States by previous experience. {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Presidents_of_the_United_States_by_previous_experience }}{\fldrslt{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Presidents_of_the_United_States_by_previous_experience\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs16  accessed 6/28/19.) In other words, most federal officers began as local politicians and voters have much more control in local elections.\par
\par
Also, not all public officials take funds from big business of special interests. Some candidates are supported by citizen donors. That's what "grassroots" means. Remember, politicians listen to their supporters, therefore, grassroots politicians look to their constituents, the voters, for input about policy decisions.\par
\par
Which brings up another point of effective voting....just voting won't do it. If an official is looking to you for input, then you should be giving them input. An effective voting strategy includes activism. For America to work the way it is supposed to work, citizens must be active in their community affairs. Activism involves attendance of town hall meetings, involvement with community think tanks, petition development and support, birddogging (attending meetings with specific politicians, encouraging them to take actions they endorse), and demonstrations when things begin to malfunction in the government.\par
\par
Three forms of political action are common - supporting candidates with money, signing petitions and calling your legislator. They're common because they're easy. They're also ineffective when done alone.\par
\par
Okay, if you're willing to give lots of money, then a candidate will take you seriously, but we're talking about the regular voter here. Throwing money at candidates generally won't work.\par
\par
How about petitions and calling candidates? When I joined Amnesty International, I began getting emails from organizations wanting me to sign petitions and call people in congress. It could have been another hobby!\par
\par
Does that work? If we inundate legislators and other politicians with requests, petitions, and phone calls, will that get their attention?\par
\par
My experience is that politicians hire people to answer their phone, give a vague, canned  answer, and then forget that you called. Politicians don't have to read letters or look at petitions. For most, it's just a waste of their time.\par
\par
The Pew Research Center (Hitlin, Paul (2016) "We the People": Five Years of Online Petitions. {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.pewinternet.org/2016/12/28/we-the-people-five-years-of-online-petitions }}{\fldrslt{https://www.pewinternet.org/2016/12/28/we-the-people-five-years-of-online-petitions\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs16   accessed{{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "7/1/19"}}{\fldrslt{\ul\cf2\cf2\ul  7/1/19}}}}\f1\fs16 . ) looked at the resuts of We the People, the online petition system created by the Obama staff in 2011, for petitioning the White House. Of the 4,799 publicly available petitions, only 268 petitions have reached the signature threhold. The White House responded to these with 227 written responses, some dealing with multiple petitions addressing similar issues. Originally the number of signatures required to reach the White House was 5000. Later, the number increased to 100,000. 15% of the responses were statements that the White House could not commit on a certain case. \par
\par
Over the five years of We the People's existence, response time by the White House has varied greatly. On the average, from the time a petition reaches the White House, the response time is 163 days. The longest response times were in 2013 when the average was 271 days. Response times have diminished since then to an average of 34 in 2016.\par
\par
In the section entitled "Petitions have limited legislative impact", the Pew report indicated only three instances hwere a petition led to clearn legislative outcomes.\par
\par
More recently, there are indicationss that the We the People website just isn't working. A, Independent report (Hooton, Christopher (2017) "White House petition to save arts funding not registering signatures". Independent, Jan. 23, 2017. {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/president-donald-trump-arts-funding-nea-neh-cpb-prs-npr-petition-white-house-a7541631.html }}{\fldrslt{https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/president-donald-trump-arts-funding-nea-neh-cpb-prs-npr-petition-white-house-a7541631.html\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs16  accessed 7/1/19) indicates that glitches in the system and online URLs that point to error pages instead of particular petitions have crippled the system. These considerations plus the fact that the poor would have a hard time even accessing the We the People webiste calls the effectiveness of the system into question.\par
\par
I've been writing about We the People, the federal system established by the Obama administration to make the executive branch more transparent and responsive to issues brought up by citizens. There are no laws that require all other officials to be equally responsive.\par
\par
There is justification for these online petitions, though. The systems that support them and automatically send out emails to participants are a great way to recruit activists and keep them up to date on current issues. (Carpenter, Daniel (2017) "Yes, signing those petitions makes a difference - even if they don't change Trump's mind". The Washington Post. Feb. 3, 2017. {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2017/02/03/yes-signing-those-petitions-makes-a-difference-even-if-they-dont-change-trumps-mind/?utm_term=.244a2c9bae8a }}{\fldrslt{https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2017/02/03/yes-signing-those-petitions-makes-a-difference-even-if-they-dont-change-trumps-mind/?utm_term=.244a2c9bae8a\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs16  accessed 7/1/19). They just don't present an effective strategy of activism for individual citizens.\par
\par
Why not think critically?\par
\par
Well, it takes work. Certainly it requires time and effort to do the homework necessary to decide who to vote for.\par
\par
Watching debates and election campaign speeches on television and reading the frequent campaign fliers that land in your mailbox are easy strategies but more campaign fliers can be sent out by campaigners who have more money. That tends to filter out grassroots campaigners and, need I say it, politicians can choose to lie. Just because a politician looks good or says the right things, that doesn't mean that you should vote for them.\par
\par
So, now, why think critically? \par
\par
Some people just don't read....they don't like to read, but the rest of us, if we buy a new computer, we will at least scan the manual to get a basic understanding of how the thing works. If we install software, we'll look over the user guide of help files. If we get a new hobby, we'll read up on it. A new car? Most new car owners will look through the owner's manual.\par
\par
I am dismayed at how few people care to learn about how their body works. They will go to a doctor and just accept what they say, take the medication they give without giving a thought to why they take it or how it works. Hobbies are secondary. They aren't necessary for survival. But you have to live with your body. If your computer quits working, you go out and buy a new computer. If your body quits working, you die.\par
\par
Your government affects every aspect of your life. As long as it works right, it's easy to ignore it, but if it stops working right, you will certainly become aware of it. In a country like the United States, where the citizen has the capacity to maintain a well functioning government, it just doesn't make sense for the people to let the government malfunction.\par
\par
So, why think critically?\par
\par
In the United States, the responsibility of maintaining an effective government is placed squarely on the citizens. If they don't attend to the job given them by the designers of that government, things will begin to fall apart (thank you, W. B. Yeats).\par
\par
Good decisions depend on critical thinking.\par
\par
Start a computer up and then set it aside. It's executive branch, the CPU, will work all by itself. It's judicial and legislative branches, the Arithmetic and Logic Unit and peripherals, will go right on doing their things. And a few years later, you will have a computer that doesn't work.\par
\par
Accidents will happen in the computer memory. Just by chance, bits will flip, 1s will become 0 and 0s will become 1s. Your memory will become corrupted. Viruses will come in from outside. And, soon, no computer.\par
\par
The same kind of things happen when a government is allowed to run without maintenance. \par
\par
So, that's it for political science. The rest of the book is about critical thinking. Next up...politicians get more bang for their buck if they target your emotions. Circumvent the assault.\par
\par
Required reading\par
\par
Bureau of International Information Programs (2016) Elections  USA: Elections. In Brief Series. Bureau of International Information Programs, U.S. Department of State. IIP Publications. Can be downloaded in a variety of formats at {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://publications.america.gov/publication/elections-usa-in-brief-series }}{\fldrslt{https://publications.america.gov/publication/elections-usa-in-brief-series\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs16   accessed 7/12/19 .\par
\par
This is the official government document about how elections work. \par
\par
Bureau of International Information Programs (2018) Outline of US Government. Bureau of International Information Programs, U.S. Department of State. IIP Publications. Can be downloaded in a variety of formats at {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://publications.america.gov/publication/outline-of-the-u-s-government-outline-series }}{\fldrslt{https://publications.america.gov/publication/outline-of-the-u-s-government-outline-series\ul0\cf0}}}}\f1\fs16   accessed 7/12/19.\par
\par
As the title says, this is a good overview of the American government.\par
\par
Philadelphia Convention (original 1787, last amended 1992) Constitution of the United States. \par
\par
This is the core of the United States government. It's available for download all over the Internet. Just do a search for "Constitution of the United States" or "US Constitution".\par
\par
Take aways\par
\par
Regardless of where you live, you have a relationship with your country and it behooves you to know what that relationship is, what powers you have as a citizen and what your responsibilities are \par
\par
In the United States, the citizens are the fourth branch of the government. They "set up the parameters" of the system. If they are not active, the system doesn't work right. Although, over the years, the system has become somewhat broken, it can be repaired if the people come together, vote rationally, and exercise their constitutional powers.\par
\par
}
 